# Admin Exam 2018

### GNU/Linux

1. What is ‘systemd’? What would be considered an alternative?
    -  systemd is a system and service manager. System-V (SysV) is considered an alternative

2. You are trying to unmount your ‘/storage’ volume, but ‘umount’ keeps compaining about it being busy. how would you determine who/what is using it. and kill that process? How would you unmount it without killing the process?
    - To find who is using it using `lsof | grep /media/whatever`
    - To kill that process use `kill -9 PID`
    -  umount -l (I think, not very sure on this part)

3. What is a chroot? Why would you use one?
    - A chroot is an operation which changes the apparent root directory for the current running process and its subsequent children.
    - Reasons to use a chroot:
        - you can use it to keep different versions of one program
        - you can use it to simulate an specific environment in order to test some features
        - you can use it to create images of a system different from your main one

4. Give 5 distinct advantages of using a package manager rather than building a program from source. What command would you run to fully update a typical Redbrick server?
    - Much easier to install packages than building from source
    - Packages are designed for your distro specifically
    - They can be uninstalled, updated, and upgraded using the package manager
    - Their dependancies will be taken care of by the package manager
    - You don't need to install developer tools on your system (make for example)
    - They are sometimes patched by the package maintainer to fix distro specific bugs

    - sudo apt-get update

5. Ubuntu 12.04 is a pile of shit and you need to upgrade to the latest LTS release of Ubuntu. What is y our process for the upgrade, such that it inconveniences users of the system the least?
    - Make a full backup of the data (I hear we do that hourly?)
    - After a proper backup of the data run `sudo apt-get update` and `sudo apt-get install update-manager-core`
    - Edit `/etc/update-manager/release-upgrades` so the Prompt=lts
    - Run `do-release-upgrade -d` to start the update
    - Run `cat /etc/lsb-release` to check you've updated successfully

6. You have a list of hundreds of comressed logfiles in /var/log. Give 3 ways of searching through these logs. Manually extracting and searching them is not an option.
    - zgrep foo compressed_logs.gz
    - zcat compressed-logs.gz | zless
    - bzgrep foo compressed-logs.bz

7. What does ‘LVM’ stand for, and what does that actually mean?
    - Logical volume management (LVM) is a form of storage virtualization that offers system administrators a more flexible approach to managing disk storage space than traditional partitioning. 

8. Give a situation where you would use each of the following commands:
    - dig
        - looking up a dns entry - `dig redbrick.dcu.ie` (displays information of redbrick.dcu.ie)
    - swapon
        - specify devices on which paging and swapping are to take place - `swapon -s` (shows summary of swap usage by device)
    - tcptraceroute
        - trace route to a network host to see, if anywhere, the route to the host is failing to complete - `tcptraceroute redbrick.dcu.ie 443` (trace route OF redbrick.dcu.ie traffic on port 443 (https))
    - w
        - look at who is logged in and what they are doing - `w greenday` (shows me what greenday is up to) 
    - du
        - estimate disk space usage - `du -sh /home/mctastic` (shows me a summary of the total disk usage of /home/mctastic)

9. What is LDAP? What is it used for in Redbrick?
    - What is LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) is an Internet protocol that programs can use to look up information from a server.
    - Redbrick uses this for logins to user services such as HackMD and Email.

10. What does FHS stand for? What is it?
    - FHS stands for the Fileystem Hierarchy Standard.
    - This defines the structure, names, locations, and permissions for many file types and directories.
    - Example: In FHS, all files and directories appear under the root directory /, even if they are stored on different physical or virtual devices.


### FreeBSD

1. What does ‘BSD’ stand for? What version do Redbrick use? What do we use it for?
    - Berkley Software Distribution
    - FreeBSD
    - Halfpint (password safe, and something else that I'm not sure of)

2. Illustrate one difference between a BSD system and a Linux system.
    - Linux is a kernel whereas BSD is an operating system (also includes the kernel). Linux doesn't become an operating system until you combine it with GNU software and some other components.

3. What is pf?
    - pf is a packert filter on BSD systems. It is like iptables on Linux.

4. How would you get a script ‘resign.sh’ to run at boot time?
    - Probably use BSD's cron. It understand `@reboot` as a time directive.
    - So, something like `@reboot /home/user/resign.sh`

5. How would you bring up a network interface on a FreeBSD system?
    - ifconfig interface ed0 (surely this isn't right)

6. What does ‘ports’ mean in the context of a FreeBSD system?
    - This usually refers to FreeBSD's ports and packages collection. This is a way for administrators to install applications. It's really cool from what I hear, I think it uses keys to verify the integrity of downloaded files?

7. How would you install a new package on FreeBSD
    - portsnap fetch $PACKAGE 
    - portsnap extract $PACKAGE

8. You’ve added yourself to the group ‘root’ on your shiny new FreeBSD server. Why have you not gained any more priveliges than a normal user?
    - This is because you also need to be added to the wheel group.
    - Use something like `pw groupmod wheel -m $USERNAME` to add a user to the wheel group.

9. What is ‘dtrace’ and what does it do?
    - dtrace is a tracing utility found on BSD.
    - It allows admins to troubleshoot and display information on the performace of not only user level software (apps, databases, webservers, etc) but on the kernel and drivers.

10. What tool would you use to modify users and groups on FreeBSD?
    - pw can be used to modify all aspects of user accounts

### Hardware

1. What does NIC stand for?
    - Network Interface Card

2. You have 5 2TB drives in a RAID 6 array. Give a short explanation of what this means, and calculate how much storage you will have available for use in this situation.
    - 5 2TB drive in RAID 6
        ```
        - - - p q
        - - p q -
        - p q - -
        p q - - -
        ```
    - This means your have dual parity. You have (essentially) 2 dual parity disks distributed across many disks (in this case 5). This means 2 disks can fail in your setup and you can still replace them using the parities efficiently.
    - Out of a possible 20TB, 18TB is available for storage.

3. What does UPS stand for? Where would you mount a UPS and why?
    - UPS stands for Uninterruptible power supply
    - A UPS is a type of power supply system that contains a battery to maintain power to provide power in the event of an outage. 
    - You should mount this in a rack enclosure??

4. What is DAS? Does Redbrick have any DAS and if so, where?
    - DAS (Direct-Attached Storage) is computer storage which is connected to only one computer not is not accessible to other computers. SSD's and HD's are examples of this for an individual computer.
    - It says we do for Azazel on docs.redbrick.dcu.ie, but I'm not sure what Worf is

5. The air conditioning in your server room has failed. What do you do?
    - Shut off any equipment that is not critical to reduce heat
    - Prop the door open and keep someone there for security purposes
    - Get big fans? For air circulation like.
    - Notfiy C&S/SU about this? I don;t think you need to ping ISS, main goal is getting someone in to fix the A/C. Preferably whoever installed it.
    - Notify members via email what has happened and what services are unavailable at this current time.
    - Monitor Devices temperatures.

6. Order these protocols in terms of transfer speed, high to low.
    - SATA
    - ATA
    - IDE
    - SAS
    - SCSI
    - QSFP+

    - I have no idea what these are at all :(

7. What is the UUID of a disk, and why would it be useful?
    - The UUID of a disk is it's Universally Unique Identifier.
    - This is useful because it can be used to identify a device independent from its mount point or device name.

8. What is an IP-KVM? Why should you use one?
    - This is a switchthat let's you manage servers over a local network or over the Internet through a standard browser.
    - You should use one because you can remotely access both computers and vm's simultaneously

9. What is a PERC? What sort of server would you find a PERC in?
    - A PERC (PowerEdge RAID Controller) is a series of disk array controllers.
    - You would find these on a Dell PowerEdge Server.

10. ECC memory is used in all Redbrick servers as standard. What is an advantage of this?
    - Error Correction Code memory protects against data corruption by automatically detecting and correcting memory errors.

### Networking

1. Write a DNS entry to bind the address 136.206.15.25 to azazel.redbrick.dcu.ie, assumining your $ORIGIN is defined as redbrick.dcu.ie.
        ```
        $TTL    604800
        @       IN      SOA     azazel.redbrick.dcu.ie. root.redbrick.dcu.ie. (
                              2         ; Serial
                         604800         ; Refresh
                          86400         ; Retry
                        2419200         ; Expire
                         604800 )       ; Negative Cache TTL
        ;
        @       IN      NS      azazel.redbrick.dcu.ie.
        azazel  IN      A       136.206.15.25
        ```

2. What does BGP stand for? What situations would it typically be used in?
    - BGP stands for Border Gateway Port.
    - Used as the routing protocol both between (external BGP) and within (internal BGP) ISP's

3. What ports do the following services typically use? What protocols do they use?
    - DNS
        - 53
    - HTTPS
        - 443
    - VNC
        -  5900+ 
    - IRC
        - 194
    - SMTP
        - 25

4. What is SNMP? What could SNMP be used for?
    - SNMP is the Simple Network Management Protocol
    - SNMP can be used to monitor different network devices.

5. Redbrick owns 2x /24 of IPv4. What does this mean?
    - This means there are two blocks of IP addresses in a registry assigned to Redbrick, and only Redbrick.
    - /24 is CIDR notation. It signifies there may be up to 254 hosts in both of these IPv4  blocks.

6. What command would you run on one of our Ubuntu 14.04 machines to get rid of your current IP address, and request a new one?
    - To release your current address - `sudo dhclient -r`
    - To request a new address - `sudo dhclient `

7. You should always change the serial number when modifying DNS entries. What does this mean, and why should you do it? What would happen if you didn’t?
    - This means you should must  make a change to the serial number before each incremental change to your DNS entry. 
    - You should do this as this is how workers keep track if they need to update their cached copy of the zone.
    - If you don't update the serial number, the worker will continue to read the cached copy of the zone.

8. What file would you modify on a Ubuntu system to make changes to network interfaces persistent?
    -  /etc/network/interfaces (I'm assuming)

9. We use Cisco and Juniper switches in Redbrick. How would you view the currently running config on a Cisco switch? How would you ensure this config remains persistent after a restart of the switch?
    - show running-configuration
    - copy running-configuration startup-configuration

10. How many disparate networks exist within Redbrick? What are they all used for?
    - Not sure, because RBVM isn't a thing right? So docs.redbrick.dcu.ie may not be correct on current number, maybe it is I don't know.

### File Systems

1. What is an inode? How would you find one?
    - An inode is a data structure in UNIX operating systems that contains important information pertaining to files within a file system.
    - ls -i /home/mctastic/public_html/index.html

2. What are symlinks? Give two ways in which they differ from hardlinks.
    - A symbolic link is a term for any file that contains a reference to another file or directory in the form of an absolute or relative path. This has a different inode number from the original.
    - Hard links are for files only. You cannot link to a file on different partition with a different inode number. 
    - If the real copy of a symlinkis deleted, the link will not work. If the real copy of a hard linkis deleted the link will work, because it accesses the underlying data the real copy was accessing.

3. Why does a user’s public_html directory have the mode lrwxrwxrwx?
    - Because it is a symbolic link

4. ext4 is a journaling file system. What is meant by this?
    - A journaling file system is a file system that keeps track of changes not yet committed to the file system's main part by recording the intentions of such changes in a data structure known as a "journal"

5. How would you determine which filesystems are currently mounted to a system?
    - Use either `cat /etc/fstab` or `df -m`

6. Express the following in octal format: drwxrw-rw-
    - 755

7. How would you mount the volume /dev/sda3 read-only to /redbrick/eggs?
    - `sudo mkdir /redbrick/eggs`
    - `sudo mount -o ro /dev/sda3 /redbrick/eggs`

8. Briefly explain the following:
    - RAID 10
        - uses disk mirroring and disk striping to protect data. It requires a minimum of four disks, and stripes data across mirrored pairs.
    - RAID 5
        - uses disk striping with parity where data and parity is evenly striped across all the disks
    - ZFS
        - No clue :(
    - umask
        - umask acts as a set of permissions that applications cannot set on files. file mode creation mask for processes and cannot be set for directories itself.
    - Sticky Bit
        - permission bit which when set permits only the owner or root user of the file or directory to modify, rename or delete the concerned file or directory.

9. What are /etc/mtab and /etc/fstab used for?
    - /etc/mtab is a list of currently mounted filesystems. 
    - /etc/fstab is a list of filesystems to be mounted at boot time.

10. What is the difference between MBR and GPT?
    - No clue what they are..

11. What are fdisk and gdisk, and in what situations would you use each?
    - fdisk - allows you to manipulate disk partition table
    - gdisk - an interactive disk parition table
    - not sure about when to use either honestly

12. What does the ‘sync’ command do? When should it be used?
    - sync writes any data buffered in memory out to disk.


### Security

1. On a Linux system, how would you disable SSH access for the root user?
    - Edit /etc/ssh/sshd_config, change PermitRootLogin from yes to no.
    - Reload sshd

2. What is fail2ban? How would you help a user who has fallen foul of fail2ban? 
    - fail2ban is a piece of software which protects against brute force attacks.
    - sudo fail2ban-client get $JAIL_NAME actionunban $IP_ADDRESS

3. Briefly explain the purpose of each of the following:
    - /etc/shadow
        - This is a file that stores encrypted (it's just a hash right?) user passwords and additional information about the user.
    - SElinux
        - SELinux provides security for the user data’s from system services.
    - dm-crypt
        - 
    - SSL
        SSL certificates are used to create an encrypted link between a client and server
    - KPTI

4. What is wrong with the following command? - mysql -uroot -hmysql.internal -p=HelloIAmTheRootPassword
    - You are passing the Root Password to the console in plaintext. This can show up in logs, history, you name it.

5. Our Apache servers run as the ‘www-data’ user, yet users’ own scripts run as those users. How is this achieved?
    - Web content should not be owned by this user, or a compromised web server would be able to rewrite a web site. Data written out by web servers will be owned by www-data.

6. You see a massive spike in traffic from a pile of Chinese IP addresses. What do you do?

7. What are Spectre and Meltdown? Briefly explain how ONE of them could be exploited.

8. Name 3 things you would do to secure a newly-installed Ubuntu 16.04 server.
    - Disable Login as Root.
    - Set up SSH key login.
    - Set up fail2ban with a sshd jail.

9. You left a terminal unlocked where you were logged into a Redbrick server as root. Someone has done something nefarious, and deleted the history files. How could you go about finding out what they did?

10. What is the difference between ‘sudo’ and ‘su’?
    - Su switches you to the root user account and requires the root account's password. Sudo runs a single command with root privileges – it doesn't switch to the root user or require a separate root user password.

11. How would you view the currently enforced iptables rules on a system?
    - iptables -L

12. What is PAM? What do we use it in conjunction with?

13. Why do Redbrick NOT use POP, FTP or Telnet?
    - Probably because sftp exists.

14. What is a CVE, and why should you care?

15. Tell us something interesting you know about computer security.
    

### Containers & Process Isolation

1. What is a container? How does one differ from a VM?
    - Virtual machines and containers differ in several ways, but the primary difference is that containers provide a way to virtualize an OS so that multiple workloads can run on a single OS instance. With VMs, the hardware is being virtualized to run multiple OS instances. Containers’ speed, agility, and portability make them yet another tool to help streamline software development.

2. What is LXC? List 2 differences between LXC and Docker.
    - LXC is a container technology which gives you lightweight Linux containers, which behave like thin VM's.
    - Differences:
        1. In comparison to Linux Containers, Docker is a single application virtualization engine which is based on containers. 
        2. The Dokcer ecosystem makes use of Dockerfiles, they let you create your container automatically according to your instructions, with your application pre-configured. There is nothing really comparable in LXC.

3. When running a Docker container, how would you bind port 22000 on the host to port 80 of the container?
    - docker run -d --name app -p 22000:80 my/app

4. What command would you use to download a Docker image from a registy? Give an example usage of this command.
    - docker pull hello-world

5. Illustrate 3 differences between Docker Swarm and Kubernetes.

6. What is a container orchestrator?
    - A container orchestrator is system which manages containerized applications in a clustered environment. Examples include Swarm & Kubernetes.

7. What is the difference between ‘docker attach’ and ‘docker exec’?

8. What is Rkt?

9. In the context of a container orchestrator, what is the significance of the term ‘consensus’?

10. What command would you use to delete unused Docker images & volumes?
    - docker image prune


### Scripting

1. Write a short script to amuse us.

```bash
#!/bin/bash
(echo "The best kind of errors, are the ones you can't see :)" && python3 ThIsfiLEdoEsNTexISt.py) 2> /dev/null
```

2. Given a list of Redbrick usernames, how would you send an email to all of those usernames, in the event our mailing lists were down?

```bash
#!/bin/bash

# This works if usernames.txt are in the form of one email per line
var=$(tr '\n' ',' < usernames.txt | cut -d% -f1-)
email=$(cat announce.txt)
echo "Subject:Test \nFrom:branch@redbrick.dcu.ie\n\n $email\n" | sendmail -t $var

```

3. Write a script to retrieve the logs of all currently running Docker containers on a system, and compress each one into a .tar file with the same name as the source container.

### Practical

password is adminexam

1. Install fail2ban

```bash
sudo apt install fail2ban
```
2. Install iptables
```bash
sudo apt install iptables
```

3.  Ban ip 136.206.169.205

```
sudo fail2ban-client -vvv set sshd banip 136.206.169.205
```

4. Disable SSH access as root

```bash
sudo vim /etc/ssh/sshd_config
```

and change `#PermitRootLogin yes` to `PermitRootLogin no`. Finally restart ssh - `sudo service ssh restart`.

5. Enforce SSH key login
Change `PasswordAuthentication yes` to `PasswordAuthentication no`, then restart ssh - `sudo service ssh restart`.
6. Create the ‘haxor’ user
```
sudo adduser haxor
```
7. Remove pi user
```
sudo deluser pi
```

8. Create a new user called pi with no login shell
```
sudo adduser --shell /usr/sbin/nologin pi
```


