# Admin Exam 2017

### GNU/Linux

1. What is ‘systemd’? What would be considered an alternative?
    -  systemd is a system and service manager. System-V (SysV) is considered an alternative

2. What does ‘LVM’ stand for, and what does that actually mean?
    - Logical volume management (LVM) is a form of storage virtualization that offers system administrators a more flexible approach to managing disk storage space than traditional partitioning. 

3. A user has somehow renamed a file to a name with strange unicode characters and you cannot delete that file by name. How would you go about deleting that file? Give commands with parameters.

4. You’ve just royally screwed your shell by running cat on a binary. How do you fix this?
    - I usually panic a nd hit Ctrl+C a bunch, then realise I need to type `reset`.

5. You are trying to unmount your ‘/storage’ volume, but ‘umount’ keeps compaining about it being busy. how would you determine who/what is using it. and kill that process? How would you unmount it without killing the process?
    - To find who is using it using `lsof | grep /media/whatever`
    - To kill that process use `kill -9 PID`
    -  umount -l (I think, not very sure on this part)

6. You have a list of hundreds of comressed logfiles in /var/log. Give 3 ways of searching through these logs. Manually extracting and searching them is not an option.
    - zgrep foo compressed_logs.gz
    - zcat compressed-logs.gz | zless
    - bzgrep foo compressed-logs.bz

7. Give 5 distinct advantages of using a package manager rather than building a program from source. What command would you run to fully update a typical Redbrick server?
    - Much easier to install packages than building from source
    - Packages are designed for your distro specifically
    - They can be uninstalled, updated, and upgraded using the package manager
    - Their dependancies will be taken care of by the package manager
    - You don't need to install developer tools on your system (make for example)
    - They are sometimes patched by the package maintainer to fix distro specific bugs
    - sudo apt-get update

8. You want to create a user to be used by a daemon. What do you set its shell to?
    - `sudo adduser --shell /usr/sbin/nologindaemonUser`

9. What is fail2ban? Is it a good idea to run it on your server, why?
    - fail2ban is a piece of software which protects against brute force attacks.
    - Self explanatory right? It bans attackers for X minutes for N attampts and brute forcing the login in Y time.

10. What is a chroot? Why would you use one?
    - A chroot is an operation which changes the apparent root directory for the current running process and its subsequent children.
    - Reasons to use a chroot:
        - you can use it to keep different versions of one program
        - you can use it to simulate an specific environment in order to test some features
        - you can use it to create images of a system different from your main one

### FreeBSD

1. Illustrate 3 differences between a GNU/Linux system and a FreeBSD system.
    - 1. Linux is a kernel whereas BSD is an operating system (also includes the kernel). Linux doesn't become an operating system until you combine it with GNU software and some other components.
    - 2. Linux typically manages installed software in binary packages. BSD typically manages a "ports" tree that you use to build software from sources.
    - 3. Different styles of booting - BSD rc.d style booting vs Linux SysV style init.d booting.
2. You’ve been added to the root group on a FreeBSD system. This, however, doesn’t enable you to do anything. Why is this the case?
    - This is because you also need to be added to the wheel group.
    - Use something like `pw groupmod wheel -m $USERNAME` to add a user to the wheel group.
3. What is a Jail? Why might you want to use one?
    - The  BSD jail mechanism is an implementation of OS-level virtualization, allowing sys admins to partition a FreeBSD-based  system into many independent mini-systems, which are called jails. 
    - You might want to use one for security and ease of administration. For example, if you want to define a clear-cut separation between hosted services and those of other users.
4. What does Redbrick use FreeBSD for? 
    - Password safe, and something else that I'm not sure of.
5. What utility would you use to manage users and groups on FreeBSD? 
    - pw can be used to modify all aspects of user accounts
6. How would you have a script ‘resign.sh’ run on startup?
    - Probably use BSD's cron. It understand @reboot as a time directive.
    - So, something like `@reboot /home/user/resign.sh`
7. How would you configure a network interface on FreeBSD?
    - `ifconfig interface ed0` (surely this isn't right)
8. What is the command to list the currently loaded pf rules?
    - `pfctl -s rules`
9. How would you install packages in FreeBSD?
    - Packages can be installed in FreeBSD through the ports system.
10. How would you show the routing table in FreeBSD?
    - `netstat -rn` works, I don't know if you can do it using `route`.
   
### Networking
1. What is an SFP? Where would you expect to find one?
    - A Small Form-factor Pluggable (SFP) is a small transceiver that plugs into the SFP port of a network switch and connects to Fibre Channel and Gigabit Ethernet (GbE) optical fiber cables at the other end. 
2. Why do we only allow packets through our firewall on a select number of ports?
    - The less ports open the better.
    
3. No one can seem to connect to anything on Redbrick. Walk us through how you would go about trouble shooting this.

4. People seem to be able to connect via IP but not via DNS. Name some tools you could use to trouble shoot this.
    - nslookup
    - dig
    - tcptraceroute
    - ip addr show
5. How would you go about looking at a config on one our switches or SRX (juniper or cisco)

6. Give the syntax for adding an entry to DNS(bind9) with the following info graphs.redbrick.dcu.ie point to 136.206.15.69 pretty.redbrick.dcu.ie point to graphs.redbrick.dcu.ie while graphs.redbrick.dcu.ie also points to 2001:41d0:e:1232::1
    - ```

    
      ```
7. Explain briefy what happens when you type in redbrick.dcu.ie into a browser.

8. When would you use tcpdump. Give an example of its syntax.
    - You would use tcpdump when you wanted to view the contents of packets on a network interface
    - `tcpdump host azazel`
9. What is a Vlan? What are they used for?
    - A VLAN (Virtual Local Access Network) is a set of end stations and the switch ports that connect them. A VLAN allows several networks to work virtually as one LAN.
10. What is a virtual interface? What file would you modify to create one?
    - A virtual interface is a virtualized representation of a computer network interface that may or may not correspond directly to a network interface controller.
    - /etc/network/interfaces 


### File Systems

1. ext4, used by most modern GNU/Linux systems, is a journaling filesystem. What is meant by this?
    - A journaling file system is a file system that keeps track of changes not yet committed to the file system's main part by recording the intentions of such changes in a data structure known as a "journal"
2. What does RAID stand for?
    - RAID (Redundant Array of Independent Disks) is a data storage virtualization technology that combines many physical disk drive components into one or more logical units for the purposes of data redundancy, performance improvement, or both.
3. Describe the structure of 3 different RAID variations, giving advantages and disadvantages for each. You may describe the structure in words, or with a diagram on the provided paper.
    - 1. RAID 5
        - Description: Uses disk striping with parity where data and parity is evenly striped across all the disks.
        - Advantages: Fault tolerance and increased performance (lower than RAID 0).
        - Disadvantages: Lower performance if performing large amounts of write operations because of parity overhead.
   - 2. RAID 5
        - Description: Uses disk striping too, but provides increased reliability as it stores an extra parity block. That effectively means that it is possible for two drives to fail at once without breaking the array.
        - Advantages: Even higher redundancy than RAID 5, with increased read performance too.
        - Disadvantages: Lower performance if performing large amounts of write operations because of parity overhead.
   - 3. RAID 10
        - Description: Uses disk mirroring and disk striping to protect data. It requires a minimum of four disks, and stripes data across mirrored pairs.
        - Advantages: Very high performance. Fault tolerance.
        - Disadvantages: Lower usable capacity/High cost. Limited scalability.
3. What is a sticky bit? How and why would you set it on a file?
    - Permission bit which when set permits only the owner or root user of the file or directory to modify, rename or delete the concerned file or directory.
4. Name a non-RAID multi disk setup. Give an advantage and a disadvantage.
    - JBOD
    - Description: It is a drive enclosure which is used as an accommodation for multiple disk drives. These enclosures can be attached to a raid managing system thereby giving a very simple means to expand the capacity of the array several times and in a quicker manner. 
    - Advantage: There is no wastage of data in the drive. There is no loss in the capacity as JBOD array lets you to combine the individual disks into one single large unit. 
    - Disadvantage: JBOD does not offer redundancy unlike the RAID technology, and lacks fault tolerance.
5. What protocol(s) might you use to mount a filesystem over a network? What one does Redbrick use?
    - NFS (ZFS on a Sunbox). NFS is what Redbrick uses.
6. What are fdisk and gdisk? What situation would you use each in?
    - fdisk is a command line tool which allows the user to create and manipulate disk partition tables, thus creating and manipulating paritions on the disk.
    - gdisk is an interactive GUID tool which allows users to create and manipulate disk partition tables too.
7. What file would you modify to mount a filesystem to the mountpoint /webtree/ on boot?
    - /etc/fstab 
8. What does the command sync do?
    - This forces everything in temporary memory storage to be written to a persistent file storage (like a disk) so none of the data is lost. 
9. What are the pros and cons of Hardware RAID & Software RAID.
    - Hardware RAID:
        - Advantages:
            - Better performance, especially in more complex configurations. 
            - Has more RAID configuration options
            - Compatible across different operating systems. 
        - Disadvantages:
            - More costly to set up initially.
            - Inconsistent performance for setups that use SSD arrays.

    - Software RAID:
        - Advantages:
            - Low cost of entry.
            - Processors can easily handle RAID 0 & 1 processing with no noticeable performance hit.
        - Disadvantages:
            - Often OS specific.
            - Performance hit if you’re using more complex RAID configurations.
10. What is a UID and a GID? Why are they useful?
    - UID = User ID
    - GID = Group ID
    - GID could be of two types, one is a primary group and the other is a secondary group.

### Security
1. How would you disable SSH login as root, on Linux?
    - Edit /etc/ssh/sshd_config, change PermitRootLogin from yes to no.
    - Reload sshd
2. Why might you want to run SSH on a non-standard port?
    - It would be harder to brute force a user login.
3. You have forgotten the passwordsafe password. How do you gain access?
    - Ask another admin, encrypt it with PGP if you have to.
4. chmod -R 777 ./* Why is this literally the worst thing ever?
    - It's basically open season for all users, groups and others to have a go at your files.
5. A user has launched a new website for another society. They type ls -l and the following is output;
    ```
    gobshite@azazel (~/public_html/) -> ls -l               [8:25] 
    total 12K 
    -rwxrwxrwx 1 gobshite member 116 2013-10-21 19:55 blah.php 
    -rwxrwxrwx 1 gobshite member 50 2013-10-21 19:25 database.php 
    -rwxrwxrwx 1 gobshite member 1593 2013-10-21 19:17 index.php 
    ```
   How would a regular user go about exploiting this?
    - 
    
6. Apache runs as the www-data user, yet users scripts run as themselves. How is this done?
    - Web content should not be owned by this user, or a compromised web server would be able to rewrite a web site. Data written out by web servers will be owned by www-data.
7. What is wrong with the following? mysql -u root -h mysql.internal -p=ThisIsTheRootPassword redbrickdb
    - You are passing the Root Password to the console in plaintext. This can show up in logs, history, you name it.
8. Our servers are being hammered by a load of Russian IPs. What do you do? 
    - Block nets assigned to the Russian Federation with iptables rules.
9. Briefly explain the purpose of each of the following:
    - /etc/shadow and /etc/group
        - 1. This is a file that stores encrypted (it's just a hash right?) user passwords and additional information about the user.
        - 2. This is a file tha defines the groups to which users belong.
    - SELinux
        - SELinux provides security for the user data’s from system services.
    - dm-crypt
    
    - SSL 
        - SSL certificates are used to create an encrypted link between a client and server

    - Telnet
        - Protocol used to provide bidirectional text based communication.
10. A major Linux security vulnerability has been announced. How do you go about patching your machines with minimal downtime?
    - 

### Scripting

1. Mailing lists are broken and we need to send the announce to all our users. Write a script to send the announce to our list of users, which is stored in a csv file, of `name,username,alt-mail` called `iShouldntHaveThis.csv`.
    - ```bash
            while IFS=, read -r col1 col2 col3
            do
                echo "$col2@redbrick.dcu.ie" >> emails.txt
            done < iShouldNotHaveThis.csv


            var=$(tr '\n', ',' < emails.txt)
            email=$(cat announce.txt)
            echo "Subject:Test \nFrom:branch@redbrick.dcu.ie\n\n $email\n" | sendmail -t $var
      ```

2. Write a script that takes usernames and password hashes from /etc/shadow. The script should then try and crack them using john the ripper. If the password is found in under 10 minutes email the user their password and tell them it’s shit.
    - 
3. You’ve realised that we run a 10 year old version of php and update it. All the old php scripts break. Turns out users with old mysql password, with a hash of length 16 bit, need to reset their password. Write a script to find all users who need to change their with the old passwords, email them saying they need to change their password and that their php has been disabled. The script should also disable those users php if it access mysql.
    - 

4. Write a script to scan all users’ web directories for world editable files. Change their permissions to the correct permissions and email the user telling them the file you changed and why this is important. 
    - 

5. Write something to make us laugh.
    - ```python
        
        from rb_committee import meeting
        import mcmahon

        while meeting == True:
            mcmahon.doesPutUpHisHandOnce()
      ```
