# Admin Exam 2013-AGM

## File Systems

1. What is an inode? How would you find one?


   Answer:

   - An inode is a data structure in UNIX operating systems that contains
     important information pertaining to files within a file system.
   - `ls -i /home/mctastic/public_html/index.html`

1. What is in `/etc/mtab`? What command would you use to display it?


   Answer:

   - all currently mounted filesystems
   - `mount`

1. `192.168.0.24:/storage /storage  nfs     nosuid,nodev,soft,intr,rw,rsize=65536,wsize=65536 0  0` What file is this from? Explain what it means.


   Answer:

   - `/etc/fstab`
   - file system (mount `/storage` located at that IP)
   - mount point (put it at `/storage` on this machine's file system)
   - filesystem type (it is a network file system)
   - Options (must explain at least one to get the mark)
     - nosuid=block operation of suid bits
     - nodev=don't interpret block special devices
     - soft=for nfs, return error if server doesn't respond
     - intr=allows nfs requests to be interrupted
     - rw=read/write
     - rsize=max size of read
     - wsize=max size of write
   - Dump freqency (never archive this partition)
   - pass number (don't fsck with this at boot)

1. What are the following?:

      1. ctime
      1. atime
      1. mtime


   Answer:

   - ctime: time of last change
   - atime: time of last access
   - mtime: time of last modification

1. What is `/proc` for? what's `/etc` for?


   Answer:

   - `/proc` - a virtual filesystem which is an interface to interact with the
     running kernel
   - `/etc` - config files

1. Name three different filesystems (not different versions of fat) and tell me a feature of each?


   Answer:

   - `ext3/4` - journaling file system, default in ubuntu
   - `nfs` - network file system, works over network
   - `reiserfs` - kills your wife
   - `ntfs` - Windows primarily

1. How would you check a disk for errors?


   Answer: fsck
1. What's the difference between hard and soft links?


   Answer:

   - hard link: a link to a file with the same inode as the linked file
   - soft link: a llink to another file path on the filesystem

## FreeBSD

1. What is pf? What command would you use to add a new rule?


   Answer:

   - pf is a packert filter on BSD systems. It is like iptables on Linux eg
     firewall.
   - `pfctl -a`

1. The manpages on a freebsd box are broken. What command will help you fix this?


   Answer: `sysinstall`
1. What does a securelevel do?


   Answer: When a securelevel is positive, the kernel disallows even root the ability to perform certain tasks
1. What is the ports tree? How do you update it? How do you search it?


   Answer:

   - A directory of makefiles and patches to make applications install and run
     on the BSDs
   - `portsnap fetch` then `portsnap update`
   - `cd /usr/ports` then `make search name="appname"`

1. Name a package management tool in freebsd other than ports


   Answer: `pkg_add`
1. On OpenBSD, what partitions do the letters "a" and "b" refer to?


   Answer:

   - a = / or root
   - b = swap

1. Why does redbrick bother using the BSDs at all at all?


   Answer: So some important boxes (pwsafe, firewalls) can have a different, hopefully smaller set of vulnerabilites.
1. How do you update the freebsd base system?


   Answer: `freebsd-upd`
## GNULinux

1. How do you check if a service is running?


   Answer: `service  status`
1. How would you search for a package on ubuntu? Give the command


   Answer: `apt-cache search`
1. How do you determine what version of ubuntu is running?


   Answer: `lsb_release -a`
1. What effect does the sticky bit have when set on a directory? What 2 directories are most commonly set with the sticky bit?


   Answer:

   - files created therein can only be deleted by their owners, the owners of
     that directory, or root
   - `/tmp` and `/var/tmp`

1. What does setting the setuid bit of an executable do? name a file that has this set.


   Answer:

   - Causes that executable to be run as it's owner
   - `/usr/bin/passwd`

1. What does Upstart (sometimes) do? What does it replace on some systems?


   Answer:

   - Starts processes on boot
   - init

1. You're trying to back up mysql, but mysqldump fails because of broken tables or the moon not being in the correct phase or somesuch shite, How do you make a backup in spite of this?


   Answer: `tar /var/lib/mysql`
1. How do you check uptime? 2 ways please


   Answer:

   - the `uptime` command
   - `cat /proc/uptime`

1. What are three advantages of installing packages from a package manager rather than building from source. What 2 commands do you use to keep packages up to date?


   Answer:

   - Any three of:
     - Faster
     - They are updated automatically
     - They've been tested with ubuntu to some degree
     - dependencies are managed
   - `apt-get update`
   - `apt-get upgrade`
   - or whatever for some other packaging system

1. What's a CVE database?


   Answer: database of information security vulnerabilites?
1. What would you use to check how much free space is on the system? Also, the command to check how much is used. What does the -h flag do for these commands?


   Answer:

   - df
   - du
   - makes it human-readable

1. You've just written a python script and made it executable, but when

   you try to run it, this error comes up:
   ```
   import: unable to open X server `' @ error/import.c/ImportImageCommand/366.
   ```
   What is most likely causing this? How do you fix it


   Answer:

   - script is executing as a shell script and not a python script
   - add `#!/usr/bin/env python` as the first line of the script"

1. What command lets you list all running processes?


   Answer: `ps aux`
## General

1. What versions of ubuntu do we run on redbrick and why?


   Answer:

   - An LTS on a general server, because it is supported 5 years from release
   - The Latest LTS on the development server, so the latest dev tools are
     available

1. What does fail2ban do and why does redbrick use it?


   Answer:

   - Fail2Ban scans logs and bans IPs that have frequent password failures.
   - Redbrick uses it to prevent people bruteforcing user logins.

1. What temperature should the server room be kept at?


   Answer: 16 Degrees Centigrade
1. What does redbrick use the following for?

     - Nagios
     - Lightweight Directory Access Protocol, or LDAP
     - Exim
     - Dirvish
     - Munin


   Answer:

   - Nagios: making sure services are running on our machines
   - LDAP: Authenticating users over various machines
   - Exim: Mail Transfer Agent
   - Dirvish: Backups
   - Munin: Graphing shit

1. Why does catting a binary screw up your shell? How do you fix this?


   Answer:

   - Catting a binary spits out control characters that change your shell
     settings
   - the "reset" command

1. How do you create a compressed tar archive? Give an example command.


   Answer: `tar -cvzf balls.tar.gz /path/to/compress`
1. What is strace for?


   Answer: Allowing you to see what system calls a program is making
1. What's a nice value. Tell me what the rules of changing them are for users and for root


   Answer:

   - process priority
   - users can only raise them
   - root can raise and lower them

1. What does cron allow you to do? How do you edit it?


   Answer:

   - Schedule processes to run at certain times
   - `crontab -e`

1. Tell me what command you would use to create a ssh tunnel from port 1010 on your local host to port 2020 on morpheus, using azazel as your forwarder. Why might you need to use an ssh tunnel in general?


   Answer:

   - `ssh -L 1010:morpheus.redbrick,dcu.ie:2020 user@azazel.redbrick.dcu.ie`
   - to access a blocked port

1. How would you search for manpages? 2 ways please.


   Answer:

   - man -k
   - apropos

1. What signal would you send a process to terminate it gracefully? How would you do this?


   Answer:

   - `SIGTERM`
   - `kill`

1. What does DNS do?


   Answer: Maps hostnames to IP addresses
## Hardware

1. What does UPS stand for? Where would you mount a UPS and why?


   Answer:

   - UPS stands for Uninterruptible power supply
   - A UPS is a type of power supply system that contains a battery to maintain
     power to provide power in the event of an outage.
   - You should mount this in a rack enclosure??

1. What is an IP-KVM? Why should you use one?


   Answer:

   - This is a switch that let's you manage servers over a local network or
     over the Internet through a standard browser.
   - You should use one because you can remotely access both computers and vm's
     simultaneously

1. Explain RAID 0, 1 and 5


   Answer:

   - RAID0: improved performance but no redundancy. more disks=higher risk of
     failure.
   - RAID1: data written identically to two drives, array can tolerate 1 drive
     dying.
   - RAID5: Needs all drives but 1 to work to operate, can tolerate 1 drive
     dying.

1. Why is a management card in a server useful?


   Answer: To be able to remotely manage just that server
1. What are 2 benefits of SAS over SATA?


   Answer:

   - Faster transfer speed
   - longer cables possible

1. What does SAN stand for? Explain a bit


   Answer:

   - Storage Attached Network
   - Attach storage devices to servers so they look like they're attached
     directly

## Networking

1. What ports do the following services typically use? What protocols do they

   use?
     - DNS
     - HTTP
     - HTTPS
     - VNC
     - IRC
     - SMTP


   Answer:

   - DNS: 53
   - HTTP: 80
   - HTTPS: 443
   - VNC: 5900+
   - IRC: 194
   - SMTP: 25

1. Explain Subnetting. What's the subnet mask of a /23? How many hosts per subnet on it?


   Answer:

   subnetting, allocating bits from the start of an IP address to act as the
   network address and using the bits left to represent the subnet/hosts
     - 255.255.254.0
     - 510 or 2^9-2

1. Difference between TCP and UDP please


   Answer:

   TCP - connection oriented, if connection is lost, server requests lost bit
   UDP - connectionless, no guarantee your data is gonna get there

1. What's a private IP address range? Give an example. What problem were these introduced to solve?


   Answer:

   - IP Address ranges that aren't routable over the global internet
   - 192.168.0.0-192.168.255.255
   - IPv4 exhaustion

1. What does NAT do?


   Answer: It associates one or many (usually private) IPs with a single public IP
1. Explain, in 5 points, how DNS works


   Answer:

   - You need a domain name's IP.
   - You check the DNS cache
   - if no joy, you ask the root dns nameserver
   - if no joy, ask server for TLD of domain name e.g. ie nameserver
   - repeat this for each bit of the domain name e.g. dcu.ie, rb.dcu.ie

1. What is a Virtual Private Network? How does it offer security?


   Answer: VPN - enables a remote computer to communicate with a network as if it were on that network. It provides security through encryption
1. What is port knocking?


   Answer: Sending packets to a series of closed ports on a firewall that opens a previously closed port
## Practical

1. 1. Create a user `ted` with a home directory of `/home/ted`

   2. Make ted a member of `harry` group and give that group write access to
      directory `/home/ted/shared`
   3. Force the directory contents to be owned by the `harry` group.
   4. The VM you are using has a free unformated partition. Format this partion
      to be swap and make the VM mount the swap patition at startup.
   5. Create a cron job that will synchronise the contents of /etc/ every night
      to a remote server over ssh. (remote server details are provided on your
      handout)


   Answer:

   1. Create a user `ted` with a home directory of `/home/ted`

      ```bash
      adduser ted
      ```
   2. Make ted a member of `harry` group and give that group write access to
      directory `/home/ted/shared`

      ``` bash
      groupadd harry
      chown ted:harry /home/ted/shared
      chmod g+w /home/ted/shared
      ```
   3. Force the directory contents to be owned by the `harry` group.

      ```bash
      chmod g+s /home/ted/shared
      chown -R ted:harry /home/ted/shared
      ```
   4. The VM you are using has a free unformated partition. Format this partion
      to be swap and make the VM mount the swap patition at startup.

      ```bash
      mkswap /dev/sda3
      swapon /dev/sda3
      ```
      add the following to /etc/fstab:
      ```
      /dev/sda3 none swap sw 0 0
      ```
   5. Create a cron job that will synchronise the contents of /etc/ every night
      to a remote server over ssh. (remote server details are provided on your
      handout)

      `crontab -e` add the following:
      ```cron
      0 0 * * * rsync -avz -e ssh /etc user@backup:/home/user/backup
      ```
      make ssh keys `ssh-keygen -b 2048 -f /path/to/sshkeys`
      copy the public part to the backup server
      `scp ./key.pub backup:/home/user/` ssh to backup server and add the
      public key into `~/.ssh/authorized_hosts`
      ```bash
      cat key.pub >> ~/.ssh/authorized_hosts
      ```

## Scripting

1. Write something to make us laugh. **(2 marks)**


   Answer:

   ```python
   from rb_committee import meeting
   import mcmahon

   while meeting == True:
       mcmahon.doesPutUpHisHandOnce()
   ```
   ```bash
   #!/bin/bash
   (echo "The best kind of errors, are the ones you can't see :)" && \
   python3 ThIsfiLEdoEsNTexISt.py) 2> /dev/null
   ```
   ```bash
   figlet DONGS
   ```

1. We are replacing tcsh because it is shit. Find all users with tcsh, and change their shell to bash. Email the user to tell them of the change


   Answer:

   ```bash
   #!/bin/bash

   tcshusers=$(getent passwd | grep tcsh | cut -d: -f 1)
   for user in $tcshusers
   do
      chsh $user -s /bin/bash
      echo "We changed your shell" | mail -s "chsh" "$user@redbrick.dcu.ie"
   done
   ```

1. It has come to our attention that a number of users have been storing out of date lecture notes on their webspace. We have been provided with a copy of each of the files. Scan /webtree for any copies of these files and if they are world readable and not password protected email admins if one is found. (You can ignore users home directories for this question.)


   Answer:

   ```python
   import hashlib
   import smtplib
   import subprocess
   from email.mime.text import MIMEText

   # Many enhancements could be made to this, but It is at least correct.
   # This solution assumes that we cannot take into account the file extension.
   # get a list of all the lecture files.
   # This assumes they are in "./files"
   findoutput = subprocess.check_output(["find", "./files", "-type", "f"])
   lecfiles = findoutput.split("\n")[:-1]

   # md5 hashes the files and puts these hashes into a list
   lecture_md5s = []
   for f in lecfiles:
       lecture_md5s.append(hashlib.md5(open(f, "rb").read()).hexdigest())

   # get a list of all world-readable files from /webtree
   findoutput = subprocess.check_output(
       ["find", "/webtree", "-type", "f", "-perm", "/o+r"]
   )
   webtreefiles = findoutput.split("\n")[:-1]

   # Make a dictionary of file paths to MD5 sums of the world-readable files
   # of /webtree
   webtree_dict = {}
   for f in webtreefiles:
       webtree_dict[f] = hashlib.md5(open(f, "rb").read()).hexdigest()

   violations = []
   for f, md5 in webtree_dict.iteritems():
       if md5 in lecture_md5s:
           violations.append(md5 + " " + f)

   violations_string = "\n".join(violations)
   msg = MIMEText(violations_string)
   msg["subject"] = "world-readable lecture notes"
   msg["from"] = "notesbot"
   msg["to"] = "gw@redbrick.dcu.ie"

   s = smtplib.SMTP("localhost")
   s.sendmail("notesbot", "gw@redbrick.dcu.ie", msg)
   s.quit()
   ```

1. We believe that a number of users are abusing redbrick services. Specifically they are running programs that are not allowed. Write a script that takes a list of usernames as an argument and will detect if they are running any of these programs. If you see the same user running banned programs more than 3 times automatically change their shell to disusered. Email admins to inform us of the users poor choices. (You may choose which programs are banned.)


   Answer:

   ```bash
   #!/bin/bash
   userlist=$1
   bannedprocs="ssh|mutt|vim"
   email="banned users were:\n\n"
   for user in $userlist; do
      numprocs=$(pgrep -u $user -c $bannedprocs"")
      if [ $numprocs -gt 3 ]; then
         chsh $user -s /usr/local/shells/disusered
         email="$email $user"
      fi
   done
   echo "$email" | mail -s "people got banned" admins@redbrick.dcu.ie
   ```

