# Admin Exam 2016-AGM

## Containers And Process Isolation

1. When running a Docker container, how would you bind port 22000 on the host to port 80 of the container? **(1 marks)**


   Answer: `docker run -d --name app -p 22000:80 my/app`
1. What command would you use to download a Docker image from a registy? Give an example usage of this command. **(4 marks)**


   Answer: `docker pull hello-world`
1. What is a container orchestrator? **(2 marks)**


   Answer: A container orchestrator is system which manages containerized applications in a clustered environment. Examples include Swarm & Kubernetes.
1. What is Docker? What does Redbrick use it for? **(2 marks)**


1. How do you make data persist across a container restart? Give an example of the command. **(2 marks)**


1. You try to run a container and it doesn’t start. How would you go about debugging the problem? **(3 marks)**


1. Write down the command you would use to launch an interactive shell in a Ubuntu container **(4 marks)**


   Answer: `docker run --rm -it ubuntu /bin/bash`
1. Write down the command you would use to network two containers together? **(4 marks)**


1. What is the name of the application used to control a Kubernetes Cluster **(2 marks)**


   Answer: kubectl
1. Describe the following terms in the context of Kubernetes: **(8 marks)**

     i. Node
     i. Pod
     i. Service
     i. Volume


1. What happens to the workers if a Kubernetes master goes down? **(2 marks)**


1. What happens if you have multiple masters in one cluster? (2) **(2 marks)**


## FreeBSD

1. What is pf? What command would you use to add a new rule?


   Answer:

   - pf is a packert filter on BSD systems. It is like iptables on Linux eg
     firewall.
   - `pfctl -a`

1. You’ve been added to the root group on a FreeBSD system. This, however, doesn’t enable you to do anything. Why is this the case? **(3 marks)**


   Answer:

   - This is because you also need to be added to the wheel group.
   - Use something like `pw groupmod wheel -m $USERNAME` to add a user to the
     wheel group.

1. What is a Jail? Why might you want to use one? **(3 marks)**


   Answer:

   - The BSD jail mechanism is an implementation of OS-level Process isolation,
     allowing sys admins to partition a FreeBSD-based system into many
     independent mini-systems, which are called jails.
   - You might want to use one for security and ease of administration. For
     example, if you want to define a clear-cut separation between hosted
     services and those of other users.

1. What does Redbrick use FreeBSD for? **(3 marks)**


   Answer: Password safe, and Bastion host
1. How would you have a script `resign.sh` run on startup? **(2 marks)**


   Answer:

   - Probably use BSD's `cron`. It understand `@reboot` as a time directive.
   - So, something like `@reboot /home/user/resign.sh`

1. How would you configure a network interface on FreeBSD? **(4 marks)**


   Answer: `ifconfig interface ed0`
1. What is 'dtrace' and what does it do?


   Answer:

   - dtrace is a tracing utility found on BSD.
   - It allows admins to troubleshoot and display information on the performace
     of not only user level software (apps, databases, webservers, etc) but on
     the kernel and drivers.

1. What does a securelevel do?


   Answer: When a securelevel is positive, the kernel disallows even root the ability to perform certain tasks
1. How do you install precompiled binaries on a BSD environment? **(3 marks)**


   Answer: `pkg-install $bin-name`
## General

1. Give 2 Primary differences between Docker Containers and VMs **(2 marks)**


## Hardware

1. What does RAID stand for? Software or Hardware? Why? **(3 marks)**


1. You have 4 Disks all with the same speed and capacity, using diagrams, give 4 possible RAID configurations. **(5 marks)**


1. Which of the 4 configs gives the optimal RW speed;Capacity and Redundancy **(3 marks)**


1. What are the following and how do they differ? **(4 marks)**

   a. DAS
   b. SAN
   c. NAS


1. What is an SFP? Where would you expect to find one? **(2 marks)**


1. What is an IP­KVM, how does it differ from a regular KVM? **(2 marks)**


## Security

1. You have forgotten the `passwordsafe` password. How do you gain access? **(2 marks)**


   Answer: Ask another admin, encrypt it with PGP if you have to.
1. What is fail2ban? How would you help a user who has fallen foul of fail2ban?


   Answer:

   - fail2ban is a piece of software which protects against brute force attacks
   - `sudo fail2ban-client get $JAIL_NAME actionunban $IP_ADDRESS`

1. What is PAM? What do we use it in conjunction with? **(3 marks)**


1. Why do Redbrick NOT use POP, FTP or Telnet? **(2 marks)**


   Answer: because all of these are unencrypted
1. What is the standard firewall bundled with Ubuntu **(1 marks)**


1. Show me all the files the www­data user currently has open **(1 marks)**


   Answer: `lsof | grep user`
1. You’re root; you attempt to ssh to another Redbrick server; why doesn’t this work? **(1 marks)**


   Answer: redbrick disables ssh as root
1. What is a chroot? When would you use one? **(3 marks)**


1. What is a sticky bit? Why would you enable it? **(2 marks)**


1. What is a bastion host? Why would you use one? What considerations should be made when creating a bastion host? **(5 marks)**


1. What is wrong with the below? (3) **(3 marks)**

   ```
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 418   Sep 25 2013  index.php
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 19930 Jan 27 09:37 license.txt
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 5035  Oct 6  22:56 wp-activate.php
   drwxrxxrwx 9  subaqua club 4096  Dec 8  23:45 wp-admin
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 271   Jan 8  2012  wp-blog-header.php
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 1369  Oct 3  15:47 wp-comments-post.php
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 3052  Jan 3  21:22 wp-config.php
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 2853  Jan 27 09:37 wp-config-sample.php
   drwxrxxrwx 6  subaqua club 103   Jan 27 09:37 wp-content
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 3286  May 24 2015  wp-cron.php
   drwxrxxrwx 16 subaqua club 8192  Dec 8  23:45 wp-includes
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 2380  Oct 24 2013  wp-links-opml.php
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 3316  Nov 5  23:59 wp-load.php
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 33770 Jan 27 09:37 wp-login.php
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 7887  Oct 6  15:07 wp-mail.php
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 13021 Nov 20 07:24 wp-settings.php
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 28594 Oct 30 08:52 wp-signup.php
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 4035  Nov 30 2014  wp-trackback.php
   -rwxrwxrwx 1  subaqua club 3061  Oct 2  23:46 xmlrpc.php
   ```


1. `echo $PATH` returns the following: `/$HOME/bin/:/home/public_html/:/usr/local/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/bin:/usr/sbin:/bin:/sbin:/usr/games` Why is this concerning? How could this be exploited? **(5 marks)**


