# Admin Exam 2017-AGM

## File Systems

1. `ext4`, used by most modern GNU/Linux systems, is a journaling file-system. What is meant by this?

A journaling file system is a file system that keeps track of changes not yet committed to the file system's main part by recording the intentions of such changes in a data structure known as a "journal"

1. What does RAID stand for?

RAID (Redundant Array of Independent Disks) is a data storage virtualisation technology that combines many physical disk drive components into one or more logical units for the purposes of data redundancy, performance improvement, or both.

1. Describe the structure of 3 different RAID variations, giving advantages and disadvantages for each. You may describe the structure in words, or with a diagram on the provided paper.

1. RAID 5
  - Description: Uses disk striping with parity where data and parity is
    evenly striped across all the disks.
  - Advantages: Fault tolerance and increased performance
    (lower than RAID 0).
  - Disadvantages: Lower performance if performing large amounts of write
    operations because of parity overhead.
2. RAID 5 (__this isnt raid 5__)
  - Description: Uses disk striping too, but provides increased
    reliability as it stores an extra parity block. That effectively means
    that it is possible for two drives to fail at once without breaking
    the array.
  - Advantages: Even higher redundancy than RAID 5, with increased read
    performance too.
  - Disadvantages: Lower performance if performing large amounts of write
    operations because of parity overhead.
3. RAID 10
  - Description: Uses disk mirroring and disk striping to protect data. It
    requires a minimum of four disks, and stripes data across mirrored
    pairs.
  - Advantages: Very high performance. Fault tolerance.
  - Disadvantages: Lower usable capacity/High cost. Limited scalability.

1. What is a sticky bit? How and why would you set it on a file?

Permission bit which when set permits only the owner or root user of the file or directory to modify, rename or delete the concerned file or directory.

1. Name a non-RAID multi disk setup. Give an advantage and a disadvantage.

- `JBOD`
- Description: It is a drive enclosure which is used as an accommodation for
  multiple disk drives. These enclosures can be attached to a raid managing
  system thereby giving a very simple means to expand the capacity of the
  array several times and in a quicker manner.
- Advantage: There is no wastage of data in the drive. There is no loss in
  the capacity as `JBOD` array lets you to combine the individual disks into
  one single large unit.
- Disadvantage: `JBOD` does not offer redundancy unlike the RAID technology,
  and lacks fault tolerance.

1. What protocol(s) might you use to mount a file-system over a network? What one does Redbrick use?

NFS (ZFS on a Sunbox). NFS is what Redbrick uses.

1. What are `fdisk` and `gdisk`? What situation would you use each in?

- `fdisk` is a command line tool which allows the user to create and
  manipulate disk partition tables, thus creating and manipulating
  partitions on the disk.
- `gdisk` is an interactive GUID tool which allows users to create and
  manipulate disk partition tables too.

1. What file would you modify to mount a file-system to the mount point `/webtree/` on boot?

`/etc/fstab`

1. What does the command `sync` do? When should it be used?

This forces everything in temporary memory storage to be written to a persistent file storage (like a disk) so none of the data is lost.

1. What are the pros and cons of Hardware RAID & Software RAID.

- Hardware RAID:
  - Advantages:
    - Better performance, especially in more complex configurations.
    - Has more RAID configuration options
    - Compatible across different operating systems.
  - Disadvantages:
    - More costly to set up initially.
    - Inconsistent performance for setups that use SSD arrays.
- Software RAID:
  - Advantages:
    - Low cost of entry.
    - Processors can easily handle RAID 0 & 1 processing with no noticeable
      performance hit.
  - Disadvantages:
    - Often OS specific.
    - Performance hit if you’re using more complex RAID configurations.

1. What is a `UID` and a `GID`? Why are they useful?

- `UID`: User ID
- `GID`: Group ID
- `GID` could be of two types, one is a primary group and the other is a
  secondary group.

## FreeBSD

1. Illustrate 3 differences between a GNU/Linux system and a FreeBSD system.

1. Linux is a kernel whereas BSD is an operating system (also includes the
   kernel). Linux doesn't become an operating system until you combine it
   with GNU software and some other components.
2. Linux typically manages installed software in binary packages. BSD
   typically manages a "ports" tree that you use to build software from
   sources.
3. Different styles of booting - BSD `rc.d` style booting vs Linux `SysV`
   style `init.d` booting.

1. You’ve been added to the root group on a FreeBSD system. This, however, doesn’t enable you to do anything. Why is this the case?

- This is because you also need to be added to the wheel group.
- Use something like `pw groupmod wheel -m $USERNAME` to add a user to the
  wheel group.

1. What is a Jail? Why might you want to use one?

- The BSD jail mechanism is an implementation of OS-level Process isolation,
  allowing sys admins to partition a FreeBSD-based system into many
  independent mini-systems, which are called jails.
- You might want to use one for security and ease of administration. For
  example, if you want to define a clear-cut separation between hosted
  services and those of other users.

1. What does Redbrick use FreeBSD for?

Password safe, and Bastion host

1. What utility would you use to manage users and groups on FreeBSD?

`pw` can be used to modify all aspects of user accounts

1. How would you have a script `resign.sh` run on startup?

- Probably use BSD's `cron`. It understand `@reboot` as a time directive.
- So, something like `@reboot /home/user/resign.sh`

1. How would you configure a network interface on FreeBSD?

`ifconfig interface ed0`

1. What is the command to list the currently loaded pf rules?

`pfctl -s rules`

1. How would you install packages in FreeBSD?

Packages can be installed in FreeBSD through the ports system.

1. How would you show the routing table in FreeBSD?

`netstat -rn` works, I don't know if you can do it using `route`.

## GNULinux

1. What is `systemd`? What would be considered an alternative?

systemd is a system and service manager. System-V (SysV) is considered an alternative

1. You are trying to unmount your `/storage` volume, but `umount` keeps complaining about it being busy. how would you determine who/what is using it. and kill that process? How would you unmount it without killing the process?

- To find who is using it using `lsof | grep /media/whatever`
- To kill that process use `kill -9 PID`
- `umount -l` (I think, not very sure on this part)

1. What is a `chroot`? Why would you use one?

- A `chroot` is an operation which changes the apparent root directory for
  the current running process and its subsequent children.
- Reasons to use a `chroot`:
  - you can use it to keep different versions of one program
  - you can use it to simulate an specific environment in order to test
    some features
  - you can use it to create images of a system different from your main one

1. Give 5 distinct advantages of using a package manager rather than building a program from source. What command would you run to fully update a typical Redbrick server?

- Much easier to install packages than building from source
- Packages are designed for your distro specifically
- They can be uninstalled, updated, and upgraded using the package manager
- Their dependencies will be taken care of by the package manager
- You don't need to install developer tools on your system
  (make for example)
- They are sometimes patched by the package maintainer to fix distro
  specific bugs
- `sudo apt-get update`

1. You have a list of hundreds of compressed logfiles in `/var/log`. Give 3 ways of searching through these logs. Manually extracting and searching them is not an option.

- `zgrep foo compressed_logs.gz`
- `zcat compressed-logs.gz | zless`
- `bzgrep foo compressed-logs.bz`

1. What does 'LVM' stand for, and what does that actually mean?

Logical volume management (LVM) is a form of storage virtualisation that
offers system administrators a more flexible approach to managing disk
storage space than traditional partitioning.

1. A user has somehow renamed a file to a name with strange unicode characters and you cannot delete that file by name. How would you go about deleting that file? Give commands with parameters.



1. You’ve just royally screwed your shell by running cat on a binary. How do you fix this?

I usually panic and hit `Ctrl+C` a bunch, then realise I need to type `reset`

1. You want to create a user to be used by a daemon. What do you set its shell to?

`sudo adduser --shell /usr/sbin/nologindaemonUser`

1. What is `fail2ban`? Is it a good idea to run it on your server, why?

- `fail2ban` is a piece of software which protects against brute force
  attacks.
- Self explanatory right? It bans attackers for X minutes for N attempts and
  brute forcing the login in Y time.

## Networking

1. What is an SFP? Where would you expect to find one?

A Small Form-factor Pluggable (SFP) is a small transceiver that plugs into the SFP port of a network switch and connects to Fibre Channel and Gigabit Ethernet (GbE) optical fiber cables at the other end.

1. Why do we only allow packets through our firewall on a select number of ports?

The less ports open the better.

1. No one can seem to connect to anything on Redbrick. Walk us through how you



1. People seem to be able to connect via IP but not via DNS. Name some tools you could use to trouble shoot this.

- `nslookup`
- `dig`
- `tcptraceroute`
- `ip addr show`

1. How would you go about looking at a config on one our switches or SRX (juniper or cisco)



1. Give the syntax for adding an entry to DNS(bind9) with the following info `graphs.redbrick.dcu.ie` point to `136.206.15.69`, `pretty.redbrick.dcu.ie` point to `graphs.redbrick.dcu.ie` while `graphs.redbrick.dcu.ie` also points to `2001:41d0:e:1232::1`

```bind9
graphs IN A 136.206.15.69
graphs IN AAAA 2001:41d0:e:1232::1
pretty IN CNAME graphs.redbrick.dcu.ie
```

1. Explain briefly what happens when you type in `redbrick.dcu.ie` into a browser.



1. When would you use `tcpdump`. Give an example of its syntax.

- You would use `tcpdump` when you wanted to view the contents of packets
  on a network interface
- `tcpdump host azazel`

1. What is a VLAN? What are they used for?

A VLAN (Virtual Local Access Network) is a set of end stations and the switch ports that connect them. A VLAN allows several networks to work virtually as one LAN.

1. What is a virtual interface? What file would you modify to create one?

- A virtual interface is a virtualised representation of a computer network
  interface that may or may not correspond directly to a network interface
  controller.
- `/etc/network/interfaces`

## Scripting

1. Mailing lists are broken and we need to send the announce to all our users. Write a script to send the announce to our list of users, which is stored in a csv file, of `name,username,alt-mail` called `iShouldntHaveThis.csv`.

```bash
while IFS=, read -r col1 col2 col3
do
    echo "$col2@redbrick.dcu.ie" >> emails.txt
done < iShouldNotHaveThis.csv

var=$(tr '\n', ',' < emails.txt)
email=$(cat announce.txt)
echo "Subject:Test
From:branch@redbrick.dcu.ie

$email" | sendmail -t $var
```

1. Write a script that takes usernames and password hashes from `/etc/shadow`. The script should then try and crack them using john the ripper. If the password is found in under 10 minutes email the user their password and tell them it’s shit.

```bash
unshadow /etc/passwd /etc/shadow.txt > passwords.txt
john --wordlist=/usr/share/wordlists/sqlmap.txt passwords.txt
john --show passwords.txt
```

1. You've realised that we run a 10 year old version of php and update it. All the old php scripts break. Turns out users with old mysql password, with a hash of length 16 bit, need to reset their password. Write a script to find all users who need to change their with the old passwords, email them saying they need to change their password and that their php has been disabled. The script should also disable those users php if it access mysql.



1. Write a script to scan all users' web directories for world editable files. Change their permissions to the correct permissions and email the user telling them the file you changed and why this is important.



1. Write something to make us laugh.

```python
from rb_committee import meeting
import mcmahon

while meeting == True:
    mcmahon.doesPutUpHisHandOnce()
```
```bash
#!/bin/bash
(echo "The best kind of errors, are the ones you can't see :)" && \
python3 ThIsfiLEdoEsNTexISt.py) 2> /dev/null
```
```bash
figlet DONGS
```

## Security

1. How would you disable SSH login as root, on Linux?

- Edit `/etc/ssh/sshd_config`, change `PermitRootLogin` from yes to no.
- Reload `sshd`

1. Why might you want to run SSH on a non-standard port?

It would be harder to brute force a user login.

1. You have forgotten the `passwordsafe` password. How do you gain access?

Ask another admin, encrypt it with PGP if you have to.

1. `chmod -R 777 ./*` Why is this literally the worst thing ever?

It's basically open season for all users, groups and others to have a go at your files.

1. A user has launched a new website for another society. They type `ls -l` and
the following is output;
```bash
gobshite@azazel (~/public_html/) -> ls -l               [8:25]
total 12K
-rwxrwxrwx 1 gobshite member 116 2013-10-21 19:55 blah.php
-rwxrwxrwx 1 gobshite member 50 2013-10-21 19:25 database.php
-rwxrwxrwx 1 gobshite member 1593 2013-10-21 19:17 index.php
```
How would a regular user go about exploiting this?

- All files are world writable this allows any user to edit the `php`
  allowing them to edit the code that is executed.
- They could read the database password from the `database.php` file and
  steal any info

1. Apache runs as the `www-data` user, yet users scripts run as themselves. How is this done?

Web content should not be owned by this user, or a compromised web server
would be able to rewrite a web site. Data written out by web servers will
be owned by `www-data`.

1. What is wrong with the following? `mysql -u root -h mysql.internal -p=ThisIsTheRootPassword redbrickdb`

You are passing the Root Password to the console in plain text. This can show up in logs, history, you name it.

1. You see a massive spike in traffic from a pile of Chinese IP addresses. What do you do?

Ban Chinese IP's via subnet with iptables rules. There's lots of chinese ip adress space  youll need a large subnet

1. Briefly explain the purpose of each of the following:
  - `/etc/shadow` and `/etc/group`
  - SELinux
  - `dm-crypt`
  - SSL
  - KPTI

- `/etc/shadow` and `/etc/group`
  - 1. This is a file that stores encrypted user passwords and additional
    information about the user.
  - 2. This is a file the defines the groups to which users belong.
- SELinux
  - SELinux provides security for the user data's from system services.
- `dm-crypt`
- SSL
  - SSL certificates are used to create an encrypted link between a client
    and server
- KPTI

