# Admin Exam 2018-AGM

## Containers And Process Isolation

1. What is a container? How does one differ from a VM?


   Answer: Virtual machines and containers differ in several ways, but the primary difference is that containers provide a way to virtualize an OS so that multiple workloads can run on a single OS instance. With VMs, the hardware is being virtualized to run multiple OS instances. Containers’ speed, agility, and portability make them yet another tool to help streamline software development.
1. What is LXC? List 2 differences between LXC and Docker.


   Answer:

   - LXC is a container technology which gives you lightweight Linux
     containers, which behave like thin VM's.
   - Differences:
     1. In comparison to Linux Containers, Docker is a single application
        virtualization engine which is based on containers.
     2. The Dokcer ecosystem makes use of Dockerfiles, they let you create your
        container automatically according to your instructions, with your
        application pre-configured. There is nothing really comparable in LXC.

1. When running a Docker container, how would you bind port 22000 on the host to port 80 of the container? **(1 marks)**


   Answer: `docker run -d --name app -p 22000:80 my/app`
1. What command would you use to download a Docker image from a registy? Give an example usage of this command.


   Answer: `docker pull hello-world`
1. Illustrate 3 differences between Docker Swarm and Kubernetes.


1. What is a container orchestrator? **(2 marks)**


   Answer: A container orchestrator is system which manages containerized applications in a clustered environment. Examples include Swarm & Kubernetes.
1. What is the difference between ‘docker attach’ and ‘docker exec’? **(2 marks)**


   Answer:

   - `docker attach < container-id >` will take you inside the bash terminal as
     it's PID 1.
   - `docker exec -it < container-id > bash` will not take you into PID 1 and
     will instead create a new process for bash

1. What is Rkt?


   Answer: rkt is an application container engine developed for modern production cloud-native environments.
1. In the context of a container orchestrator, what is the significance of the term ‘consensus’?


1. What command would you use to delete unused Docker images & volumes?


   Answer: `docker system prune -a -f`
## File Systems

1. What does the command `sync` do? When should it be used? **(1 marks)**


   Answer: This forces everything in temporary memory storage to be written to a persistent file storage (like a disk) so none of the data is lost.
1. What are symlinks? Give two ways in which they differ from hardlinks.


   Answer:

   - A symbolic link is a term for any file that contains a reference to
     another file or directory in the form of an absolute or relative path.
     This has a different inode number from the original.
   - Hard links are for files only. You cannot link to a file on different
     partition with a different inode number.
   - If the real copy of a symlinkis deleted, the link will not work. If the
     real copy of a hard linkis deleted the link will work, because it accesses
     the underlying data the real copy was accessing.

1. What is an inode? How would you find one?


   Answer:

   - An inode is a data structure in UNIX operating systems that contains
     important information pertaining to files within a file system.
   - `ls -i /home/mctastic/public_html/index.html`

1. Why does a user’s public_html directory have the mode lrwxrwxrwx?


   Answer: Because it is a symbolic link
1. How would you determine which filesystems are currently mounted to a system?


   Answer: Use either `cat /etc/fstab` or `mount`
1. Express the following in octal format: drwxrw-rw-


   Answer: 766
1. How would you mount the volume `/dev/sda3` read-only to `/redbrick`?


   Answer:

   - `sudo mkdir /redbrick/eggs`
   - `sudo mount -o ro /dev/sda3 /redbrick/eggs`

1. ext4 is a journaling file system. What is meant by this?


   Answer: A journaling file system is a file system that keeps track of changes not yet committed to the file system's main part by recording the intentions of such changes in a data structure known as a `journal`
1. What are /etc/mtab and /etc/fstab used for?


   Answer:

   - `/etc/mtab` is a list of currently mounted filesystems.
   - `/etc/fstab` is a list of filesystems to be mounted at boot time.

1. What is the difference between MBR and GPT?


   Answer:

   - Master Boot Record is a partition scheme that defines partitions of three
     types - primary, logical and extended.
   - GUID Partition Table is also a parition scheme which defines primary
     partitions only. The reason for this is because it has no boot record.

1. What are `fdisk` and `gdisk`, and in what situations would you use each?


   Answer:

   - `fdisk` - allows you to manipulate disk partition table
   - `gdisk` - acts like `fdisk` but for `GPT`.
   - you would use either for partitioning the hard disk.

1. Briefly explain the following;
  - RAID 10
  - RAID 5
  - `ZFS`
  - `umask`
  - Sticky Bit

   Answer:

   - RAID 10
     - uses disk mirroring and disk striping to protect data. It requires a
       minimum of four disks, and stripes data across mirrored pairs.
   - RAID 5
     - uses disk striping with parity where data and parity is evenly striped
       across all the disks
   - `ZFS`
     - does everything `LVM`, RAID, other file systems (`ext4`) - internally
       implements RAID 5, 6 and "7" (which doesn't exist). Magic due to Copy on
       Write and checksumming - so look those up.
   - `umask`
     - `umask` acts as a set of permissions that applications cannot set on
       files. file mode creation mask for processes and cannot be set for
       directories itself.
   - Sticky Bit
     - permission bit which when set permits only the owner or root user of the
       file or directory to modify, rename or delete the concerned file or
       directory.

## FreeBSD

1. What is pf? What command would you use to add a new rule?


   Answer:

   - pf is a packert filter on BSD systems. It is like iptables on Linux eg
     firewall.
   - `pfctl -a`

1. What does ‘BSD’ stand for? What version does Redbrick use? What do we use it for?


   Answer:

   - Berkley Software Distribution
   - FreeBSD
   - Halfpint (password safe, and admin box/bastion host)

1. Illustrate 3 differences between a GNU/Linux system and a FreeBSD system. **(3 marks)**


   Answer:

   1. Linux is a kernel whereas BSD is an operating system (also includes the
      kernel). Linux doesn't become an operating system until you combine it
      with GNU software and some other components.
   2. Linux typically manages installed software in binary packages. BSD
      typically manages a "ports" tree that you use to build software from
      sources.
   3. Different styles of booting - BSD `rc.d` style booting vs Linux `SysV`
      style `init.d` booting.

1. You’ve been added to the root group on a FreeBSD system. This, however, doesn’t enable you to do anything. Why is this the case? **(3 marks)**


   Answer:

   - This is because you also need to be added to the wheel group.
   - Use something like `pw groupmod wheel -m $USERNAME` to add a user to the
     wheel group.

1. What utility would you use to manage users and groups on FreeBSD? **(1 marks)**


   Answer: `pw` can be used to modify all aspects of user accounts
1. How would you have a script `resign.sh` run on startup? **(2 marks)**


   Answer:

   - Probably use BSD's `cron`. It understand `@reboot` as a time directive.
   - So, something like `@reboot /home/user/resign.sh`

1. How would you configure a network interface on FreeBSD? **(4 marks)**


   Answer: `ifconfig interface ed0`
1. What does `ports` mean in the context of a FreeBSD system?


   Answer: This usually refers to FreeBSD's ports and packages collection. This is a way for administrators to install applications. It's really cool from what I hear, I think it uses keys to verify the integrity of downloaded files?
1. How would you install a new package on FreeBSD


   Answer:

   - portsnap fetch \$PACKAGE
   - portsnap extract \$PACKAGE

1. What is 'dtrace' and what does it do?


   Answer:

   - dtrace is a tracing utility found on BSD.
   - It allows admins to troubleshoot and display information on the performace
     of not only user level software (apps, databases, webservers, etc) but on
     the kernel and drivers.

## GNULinux

1. What is `systemd`? What would be considered an alternative? **(2 marks)**


   Answer: systemd is a system and service manager. System-V (SysV) is considered an alternative
1. You are trying to unmount your `/storage` volume, but `umount` keeps complaining about it being busy. how would you determine who/what is using it. and kill that process? How would you unmount it without killing the process? **(4 marks)**


   Answer:

   - To find who is using it using `lsof | grep /media/whatever`
   - To kill that process use `kill -9 PID`
   - `umount -l` (I think, not very sure on this part)

1. What is a `chroot`? Why would you use one? **(3 marks)**


   Answer:

   - A `chroot` is an operation which changes the apparent root directory for
     the current running process and its subsequent children.
   - Reasons to use a `chroot`:
     - you can use it to keep different versions of one program
     - you can use it to simulate an specific environment in order to test
       some features
     - you can use it to create images of a system different from your main one

1. Give 5 distinct advantages of using a package manager rather than building a program from source. What command would you run to fully update a typical Redbrick server? **(5 marks)**


   Answer:

   - Much easier to install packages than building from source
   - Packages are designed for your distro specifically
   - They can be uninstalled, updated, and upgraded using the package manager
   - Their dependencies will be taken care of by the package manager
   - You don't need to install developer tools on your system
     (make for example)
   - They are sometimes patched by the package maintainer to fix distro
     specific bugs
   - `sudo apt-get update`

1. Ubuntu 12.04 is a pile of shit and you need to upgrade to the latest LTS release of Ubuntu. What is y our process for the upgrade, such that it inconveniences users of the system the least?


   Answer:

   - Make a full backup of the data (I hear we do that hourly?)
   - After a proper backup of the data run `sudo apt-get update` and
     `sudo apt-get install update-manager-core`
   - Edit `/etc/update-manager/release-upgrades` so the Prompt=lts
   - Run `do-release-upgrade -d` to start the update
   - Run `cat /etc/lsb-release` to check you've updated successfully

1. You have a list of hundreds of compressed logfiles in `/var/log`. Give 3 ways of searching through these logs. Manually extracting and searching them is not an option. **(3 marks)**


   Answer:

   - `zgrep foo compressed_logs.gz`
   - `zcat compressed-logs.gz | zless`
   - `bzgrep foo compressed-logs.bz`

1. What does 'LVM' stand for, and what does that actually mean? **(2 marks)**


   Answer:

   Logical volume management (LVM) is a form of storage virtualisation that
   offers system administrators a more flexible approach to managing disk
   storage space than traditional partitioning.

1. Give a situation where you would use each of the following commands:
  - dig
  - swapon
  - tcptraceroute
  - w
  - du

   Answer:

   dig:
     - looking up a dns entry
     - `dig redbrick.dcu.ie` (displays information of redbrick.dcu.ie)
   swapon:
     - specify devices on which paging and swapping are to take place
     - `swapon -s` (shows summary of swap usage by device)
   tcptraceroute:
     - trace route to a network host to see, if anywhere, the route to the host
       is failing to complete
     - `tcptraceroute redbrick.dcu.ie 443` (trace route OF redbrick.dcu.ie
       traffic on port 443 (https))
   w:
     - look at who is logged in and what they are doing
     - `w greenday` (shows me what greenday is up to)
   du:
     - estimate disk space usage
     - `du -sh /home/mctastic` (shows me a summary of the total disk usage of
       `/home/mctastic`)

1. What is LDAP? What is it used for in Redbrick?


   Answer:

   - What is LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) is an Internet
     protocol that programs can use to look up information from a server.
   - Redbrick uses this for logins to user services such as HackMD and Email.

1. What does FHS stand for? What is it?


   Answer:

   - FHS stands for the Fileystem Hierarchy Standard.
   - This defines the structure, names, locations, and permissions for many
     file types and directories.
   - Example: In FHS, all files and directories appear under the root directory
     `/`, even if they are stored on different physical or virtual devices.

## Hardware

1. What does NIC stand for?


   Answer: Network Interface Card
1. You have 5 2TB drives in a RAID 6 array. Give a short explanation of what this means, and calculate how much storage you will have available for use in this situation.


   Answer:

   - 5 2TB drive in RAID 6
     ```
     - - - p q
     - - p q -
     - p q - -
     p q - - -
     ```
   - This means your have dual parity. You have (essentially) 2 dual parity
     disks distributed across many disks (in this case 5). This means 2 disks
     can fail in your setup and you can still replace them using the parities
     efficiently.
   - Out of a possible 20TB, 18TB is available for storage.

1. What does UPS stand for? Where would you mount a UPS and why?


   Answer:

   - UPS stands for Uninterruptible power supply
   - A UPS is a type of power supply system that contains a battery to maintain
     power to provide power in the event of an outage.
   - You should mount this in a rack enclosure??

1. What is DAS? Does Redbrick have any DAS and if so, where?


   Answer:

   - DAS (Direct-Attached Storage) is computer storage which is connected to
     only one computer not is not accessible to other computers. SSD's and HD's
     are examples of this for an individual computer.
   - It says we do for Azazel on docs.redbrick.dcu.ie, but I'm not sure what
     Worf is

1. The air conditioning in your server room has failed. What do you do?


   Answer:

   - Shut off any equipment that is not critical to reduce heat
   - Prop the door open and keep someone there for security purposes
   - Get big fans? For air circulation like.
   - Notfiy C&S/SU about this? I don;t think you need to ping ISS, main goal is
     getting someone in to fix the A/C. Preferably whoever installed it.
   - Notify members via email what has happened and what services are
     unavailable at this current time.
   - Monitor Devices temperatures.

1. Order these protocols in terms of transfer speed, high to low.
- SATA
- ATA
- IDE
- SAS
- SCSI
- QSFP+

1. What is the UUID of a disk, and why would it be useful?


   Answer:

   - The UUID of a disk is it's Universally Unique Identifier.
   - This is useful because it can be used to identify a device independent from
     its mount point or device name.

1. What is an IP-KVM? Why should you use one?


   Answer:

   - This is a switch that let's you manage servers over a local network or
     over the Internet through a standard browser.
   - You should use one because you can remotely access both computers and vm's
     simultaneously

1. What is a PERC? What sort of server would you find a PERC in?


   Answer:

   - A PERC (PowerEdge RAID Controller) is a series of disk array controllers.
   - You would find these on a Dell PowerEdge Server.

1. ECC memory is used in all Redbrick servers as standard. What is an advantage of this?


   Answer: Error Correction Code memory protects against data corruption by automatically detecting and correcting memory errors.
## Networking

1. What ports do the following services typically use? What protocols do they
use?
  - DNS
  - HTTP
  - HTTPS
  - VNC
  - IRC
  - SMTP

   Answer:

   - DNS: 53
   - HTTP: 80
   - HTTPS: 443
   - VNC: 5900+
   - IRC: 194
   - SMTP: 25

1. What is SNMP? What could SNMP be used for?


   Answer:

   - SNMP is the Simple Network Management Protocol
   - SNMP can be used to monitor different network devices.

1. Write a DNS entry to bind the address `136.206.15.25` to `azazel.redbrick.dcu.ie`, assumining your $ORIGIN is defined as `redbrick.dcu.ie`.


   Answer:

   ```bind9
   $TTL 604800 @ IN SOA azazel.redbrick.dcu.ie. root.redbrick.dcu.ie. ;
      Serial 604800 ;
      Refresh 86400 ;
      Retry 2419200 ;
      Expire 604800 ;
      Negative Cache TTL ;
    @ IN NS azazel.redbrick.dcu.ie. azazel IN A 136.206.15.25
    ```

1. What does BGP stand for? What situations would it typically be used in?


   Answer:

   - BGP stands for Border Gateway Port.
   - Used as the routing protocol both between (external BGP) and within
     (internal BGP) ISP's

1. What command would you run on one of our Ubuntu 14.04 machines to get rid of your current IP address, and request a new one?


   Answer:

   - To release your current address - `sudo dhclient -r`
   - To request a new address - `sudo dhclient`

1. Redbrick owns 2x /24 of IPv4. What does this mean?


   Answer:

   - This means there are two blocks of IP addresses in a registry assigned to
     Redbrick, and only Redbrick.
   - /24 is CIDR notation. It signifies there may be up to 254 hosts in both of
     these IPv4 blocks.

1. What file would you modify on a Ubuntu system to make changes to network interfaces persistent?


   Answer: `/etc/network/interfaces`
1. We use Cisco and Juniper switches in Redbrick. How would you view the currently running config on a Cisco switch? How would you ensure this config remains persistent after a restart of the switch?


   Answer:

   - show running-configuration
   - copy running-configuration startup-configuration

1. How many disparate networks exist within Redbrick? What are they all used for?


   Answer: Not sure, because RBVM isn't a thing right? So docs.redbrick.dcu.ie may not be correct on current number, maybe it is I don't know.
1. You should always change the serial number when modifying DNS entries. What does this mean, and why should you do it? What would happen if you didn’t?


   Answer:

   - This means you should must make a change to the serial number before each
     incremental change to your DNS entry.
   - You should do this as this is how workers keep track if they need to
     update their cached copy of the zone.
   - If you don't update the serial number, the worker will continue to read
     the cached copy of the zone.

## Practical

1. password is adminexam
1. Install fail2ban
2. Install iptables
3. Ban ip `136.206.169.205`
4. Disable SSH access as root
5. Enforce SSH key login Change
6. Create the ‘haxor’ user
7. Remove pi user
8. Create a new user called pi with no login shell

   Answer:

   1. Install fail2ban
      ```bash
      sudo apt install fail2ban
      ```
   2. Install iptables
      ```bash
      sudo apt install iptables
      ```
   3.  Ban ip 136.206.169.205
       ```
       sudo fail2ban-client -vvv set sshd banip 136.206.169.205
       ```
   4. Disable SSH access as root
      ```bash
      sudo vim /etc/ssh/sshd_config
      ```
      and change `#PermitRootLogin yes` to `PermitRootLogin no`.
      Finally restart ssh `sudo service ssh restart`.
   5. Enforce SSH key login Change

      `PasswordAuthentication yes` to `PasswordAuthentication no`, then restart
      ssh `sudo service ssh restart`.
   6. Create the `haxor` user
      ```
      sudo adduser haxor
      ```
   7. Remove pi user
      ```
      sudo deluser pi
      ```
   8. Create a new user called pi with no login shell
      ```
      sudo adduser --shell /usr/sbin/nologin pi
      ```

## Scripting

1. Mailing lists are broken and we need to send the announce to all our users. Write a script to send the announce to our list of users, which is stored in a csv file, of `name,username,alt-mail` called `iShouldntHaveThis.csv`. **(3 marks)**


   Answer:

   ```bash
   while IFS=, read -r col1 col2 col3
   do
       echo "$col2@redbrick.dcu.ie" >> emails.txt
   done < iShouldNotHaveThis.csv

   var=$(tr '\n', ',' < emails.txt)
   email=$(cat announce.txt)
   echo "Subject:Test
   From:branch@redbrick.dcu.ie

   $email" | sendmail -t $var
   ```

1. Write something to make us laugh. **(2 marks)**


   Answer:

   ```python
   from rb_committee import meeting
   import mcmahon

   while meeting == True:
       mcmahon.doesPutUpHisHandOnce()
   ```
   ```bash
   #!/bin/bash
   (echo "The best kind of errors, are the ones you can't see :)" && \
   python3 ThIsfiLEdoEsNTexISt.py) 2> /dev/null
   ```
   ```bash
   figlet DONGS
   ```

1. Write a script to retrieve the logs of all currently running Docker containers on a system, and compress each one into a `.tar` file with the same name as the source container.


## Security

1. How would you disable SSH login as root, on Linux? **(3 marks)**


   Answer:

   - Edit `/etc/ssh/sshd_config`, change `PermitRootLogin` from yes to no.
   - Reload `sshd`

1. Apache runs as the `www-data` user, yet users scripts run as themselves. How is this done? **(3 marks)**


   Answer:

   Web content should not be owned by this user, or a compromised web server
   would be able to rewrite a web site. Data written out by web servers will
   be owned by `www-data`.

1. What is wrong with the following? `mysql -u root -h mysql.internal -p=ThisIsTheRootPassword redbrickdb` **(2 marks)**


   Answer: You are passing the Root Password to the console in plain text. This can show up in logs, history, you name it.
1. You see a massive spike in traffic from a pile of Chinese IP addresses. What do you do? **(2 marks)**


   Answer: Ban Chinese IP's via subnet with iptables rules. There's lots of chinese ip adress space  youll need a large subnet
1. Briefly explain the purpose of each of the following: **(5 marks)**
  - `/etc/shadow` and `/etc/group`
  - SELinux
  - `dm-crypt`
  - SSL
  - KPTI

   Answer:

   - `/etc/shadow` and `/etc/group`
     - 1. This is a file that stores encrypted user passwords and additional
       information about the user.
     - 2. This is a file the defines the groups to which users belong.
   - SELinux
     - SELinux provides security for the user data's from system services.
   - `dm-crypt`
   - SSL
     - SSL certificates are used to create an encrypted link between a client
       and server
   - KPTI

1. How would you view the currently enforced iptables rules on a system?


   Answer: `iptables -L`
1. What are Spectre and Meltdown? Briefly explain how ONE of them could be exploited.


   Answer:

   - Spectre and Meltdown are vulnerabilities in modern machines which leak
     passwords and other sensitive data.
   - Meltdown breaks the most fundamental isolation between user applications
     and the operating system. This attack allows a program to access the
     memory, and thus also the secrets, of other programs and the operating
     system.

1. What is fail2ban? How would you help a user who has fallen foul of fail2ban?


   Answer:

   - fail2ban is a piece of software which protects against brute force attacks
   - `sudo fail2ban-client get $JAIL_NAME actionunban $IP_ADDRESS`

1. What is a CVE, and why should you care?


1. Tell us something interesting you know about computer security.


1. You left a terminal unlocked where you were logged into a Redbrick server as root. Someone has done something nefarious, and deleted the history files. How could you go about finding out what they did?


1. Name 3 things you would do to secure a newly-installed Ubuntu 16.04 server.


   Answer:

   - Disable Login as Root.
   - Set up SSH key login.
   - Set up fail2ban with a sshd jail.

1. What is the difference between ‘sudo’ and ‘su’?


   Answer: Su switches your account to another user requiring the users loging when no args are passed it defaults to the root user. Sudo runs a single command with root privileges – it doesn't switch to the root user or require a separate root user password.
1. What is PAM? What do we use it in conjunction with?


1. Why do Redbrick NOT use POP, FTP or Telnet?


   Answer: because all of these are unencrypted
